<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>VIII: The Evening Prayer</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-8" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Evening Prayer</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Petit-Pierre had raised his head and was looking about him with a thoughtful air.</p>
			<p>“Oh, that is the way he always does, whenever he hears the sound of eating,” said Germain. “The explosion of a cannon would not rouse him, but if you work your jaws near him, he opens his eyes at once.”</p>
			<p>“You must have been just like him at his age,” said little Marie, with a sly smile. “See! my Petit-Pierre, you are looking for your canopy. Tonight it is made all of green, my child; but your father eats his supper none the less. Do you wish to sup with him? I have not eaten your share; I thought that you might claim it.”</p>
			<p>“Marie, I wish you to eat,” cried the husbandman; “I shall not touch another morsel. I am a greedy glutton. You are depriving yourself for our sake. It is not fair. I am ashamed. It takes away all my appetite. I will not have my son eat his supper unless you take some too.”</p>
			<p>“Leave us alone,” said little Marie; “you have not the key to our appetites. Mine is tight shut today, but your Pierre’s is as wide open as a little wolfs. Just see how he seizes his food. He will be a strong workman too, some day!”</p>
			<p>In truth, Petit-Pierre showed very soon whose son he was, and though scarcely awake and wholly at a loss to know where he was and how he had come there, he began to eat ravenously. As soon as his hunger was appeased, feeling excited as children do who break loose from their wonted habits, he had more wit, more curiosity, and more good sense than usual. He made them explain to him where he was, and when he found that he was in the midst of a forest, he grew a little frightened.</p>
			<p>“Are there wicked beasts in this forest?” he demanded of his father.</p>
			<p>“No, none at all. Don’t be afraid.”</p>
			<p>“Then you told a story when you said that if I went with you into the great forest, the wolves would carry me off.”</p>
			<p>“Just see this logician,” said Germain, embarrassed.</p>
			<p>“He is right,” replied little Marie. “That is what you told him. He has a good memory, and has not forgotten. But, little Pierre, you must learn that your father never tells a story. We passed through the big forest whilst you were sleeping, and now we are in the small forest where there are no wicked beasts.”</p>
			<p>“Is the little forest very far away from the big one?”</p>
			<p>“Far enough; besides, the wolves never go out of the big forest. And then, if some of them should come here, your father would kill them.”</p>
			<p>“And you too, little Marie?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, we, too, for you would help also, my Pierre. You are not frightened, are you? You would beat them soundly?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, indeed, I would,” said the child, proudly, as he struck a heroic attitude; “we would kill them.”</p>
			<p>“There is nobody like you for talking to children and for making them listen to reason,” said Germain to little Marie. “To be sure, it is not long ago since you were a small child yourself, and you have not forgotten what your mother used to say to you. I believe that the younger one is, the better one gets on with children. I am very much afraid that a woman of thirty who does not yet know what it is to be a mother, would find it hard to prattle to children and reason with them.”</p>
			<p>“Why, Germain? I don’t know why you have such a bad idea of this woman; you will change your mind.”</p>
			<p>“The devil take the woman!” exclaimed Germain. “I wish I were going away from her forever. What do I want of a wife whom I don’t know?”</p>
			<p>“Little father,” said the child, “why is it that you speak so much of your wife today, since she is dead?”</p>
			<p>“Then you have not forgotten your poor, dear mother?”</p>
			<p>“No; for I saw her placed in a beautiful box of white wood, and my grandmother led me up to her to kiss her and say goodbye. She was very white and very stiff, and every evening my aunt made me pray God that she might go to him in Heaven and be warm. Do you think that she is there now?”</p>
			<p>“I hope so, my child; but you must always pray. It shows your mother that you love her.”</p>
			<p>“I am going to say my prayers,” answered the boy. “I forgot them tonight. But I can’t say them all alone, for I always forget something. Little Marie must help me.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, my Pierre, I will help you,” said the young girl. “Come and kneel down in my lap.”</p>
			<p>The child knelt down on the girl’s skirt. He clasped his little hands and began to say his prayers, at first with great care and earnestness, for he knew the beginning very well, then slowly and with more hesitation, and finally repeating word by word after Marie, when he came to that place in his prayer where sleep overtook him so invariably that he had never been able to learn the end. This time again the effort of close attention and the monotony of his own accent produced their wonted effect. He pronounced the last syllables with great difficulty, and only after they were thrice repeated.</p>
			<p>His head grew heavy and fell on Marie’s breast; his hands unclasped, divided, and fell open on his knees. By the light of the campfire, Germain watched his little darling hushed at the heart of the young girl, who, as she held him in her arms and warmed his fair hair with her sweet breath, had herself fallen into a holy reverie, and prayed in quiet for the soul of Catherine.</p>
			<p>Germain was touched. He tried to express to little Marie the grateful esteem which he felt for her, but he could find no fitting words.</p>
			<p>He approached her to kiss his son, whom she held close to her breast, and he could scarcely raise his lips from little Pierre’s brow.</p>
			<p>“You kiss too hard,” said Marie, gently pushing away the husbandman’s head. “You will wake him. Let me put him back to bed, for the boy has left us already for dreams of paradise.”</p>
			<p>The child allowed Marie to lay him down, but feeling the goatskin on the saddle, he asked if he were on the gray. Then opening his big blue eyes, and keeping them fixed on the branches for a minute, he seemed to be dreaming, wide-awake as he was, or to be struck with an idea which had slipped his mind during the daytime, and only assumed a distinct form at the approach of sleep.</p>
			<p>“Little father,” said he, “if you wish to give me a new mother, I hope it will be little Marie.”</p>
			<p>And without waiting for an answer, he closed his eyes and slept.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
