<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>VII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-7" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>VII⁠—Underneath the Big Oaks</h2>
			<p>“Well, we must be patient, Germain,” said little Marie. “We are not badly off on this little hillock. The rain does not pierce the leaves of these big oaks, and we can light a fire, for I can feel old stumps which stir readily and are dry enough to burn. You have a light, Germain, have you not? You were smoking your pipe a few minutes ago.”</p>
			<p>“I did have; my tinderbox was in my bag on the saddle with the game that I was bringing to my bride that is to be, but that devilish mare has run away with everything, even with my cloak, which she will lose and tear to bits on every branch she comes to.” “No, no, Germain; saddle and cloak and bag are all there on the ground at your feet. The gray burst her girths, and threw off everything as she ran away.”</p>
			<p>“That’s true, thank God,” exclaimed the laborer; “if we can grope about and find a little dead wood, we shall be able to dry ourselves and get warm.”</p>
			<p>“That ‘s not difficult,” said little Marie; “dead wood always cracks when you step on it. But will you give me the saddle?”</p>
			<p>“What do you want of it?”</p>
			<p>“To make a bed for the child. No, not that way. Upside down. He will not roll off into the hollow, and it is still very warm from the horse’s back. Prop it up all around with the stones that you see there.”</p>
			<p>“I can’t see a stone; you must have cat’s eyes.”</p>
			<p>“There, it is all done, Germain. Hand me your cloak so that you can wrap up his little feet, and throw my cape over his body. Just see if he is not as comfortable as though he were in his own bed, and feel how warm he is.”</p>
			<p>“You certainly know how to take care of children, Marie.”</p>
			<p>“I need not be a witch to do that; now get your tinderbox from your bag, and I will arrange the wood.”</p>
			<p>“This wood will never catch fire; it is too damp.”</p>
			<p>“You are always doubting, Germain. Don’t you remember when you were a shepherd, and made big fires in the fields right in the midst of the rain?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, that is a knack that belongs to children who take care of sheep; but I was made to drive the oxen as soon as I could walk.”</p>
			<p>“That is what has made your arms strong and your hands quick! Here, the fire is built; you shall see whether it does not burn. Give me the light and a handful of dry ferns. That is all right Now blow; you are not consumptive, are you?”</p>
			<p>“Not that I know of,” said Germain, blowing like a smith’s bellows. In an instant the flame leaped up, and throwing out a red glare, it rose finally in pale blue jets under the oak branches, battling with the fog, and gradually drying the atmosphere for ten feet around.</p>
			<p>“Now I am going to sit by the child, so that the sparks may not fall on him,” said the young girl. “Pile on the wood and stir up the fire, Germain; we shall not catch cold nor fever here, I will answer for it.”</p>
			<p>“Upon my word, you are a clever girl,” said Germain; “and you know how to make a fire like a little fairy of the night. I feel quite revived, and my courage has come back again; for with my legs drenched up to the knees, and with the thought of staying this way till daylight, I was in a very bad temper just now.”</p>
			<p>“And when people are in a bad temper they don’t think of anything,” answered little Marie.</p>
			<p>“And are you never bad-tempered?”</p>
			<p>“No, never; what is the good of it?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, of course, there is no good; but how can you help it when you have troubles? Yet Heaven knows that you have not lacked them, my little girl; for you have not always been happy.”</p>
			<p>“It is true that my mother and I have suffered. We have had sorrows, but we have never lost heart.”</p>
			<p>“I should never lose heart, no matter how hard my work was,” said Germain, “but poverty would make me very sad; for I have never wanted for anything. My wife made me rich, and I am rich still; I shall be so as long as I work on the farm; and that will be always, I hope. But everybody must suffer his share! I have suffered in another way.”</p>
			<p>“Yes; you have lost your wife. That is very sad.”</p>
			<p>“Is n’t it?”</p>
			<p>“Oh! Germain, I have wept for her many a time. She was so very kind! But don’t let us talk about her longer, for I shall burst out crying. All my troubles are ready to come back to me to-day.”</p>
			<p>“It is true, she loved you dearly, little Marie. She used to make a great deal of you and your mother. Are you crying? Come, my girl, I don’t want to cry.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“But you are crying, Germain! You are crying as hard as I. Why should a man be ashamed to weep for his wife? Don’t let me trouble you. That sorrow is mine as well as yours.”</p>
			<p>“You have a kind heart, Marie, and it does me good to weep with you. Put your feet nearer the fire; your skirts are all soaked, too, poor little girl. I am going to take your place by the boy. You move nearer the fire.”</p>
			<p>“I am hot enough,” said Marie; “and if you wish to sit down, take a corner of the cloak. I am perfectly comfortable.”</p>
			<p>“The truth is that it is not so bad here,” said Germain, as he sat down beside her. “Only I feel very hungry again. It is almost nine o’clock, and I have had such hard work in walking over these vile roads that I feel quite tired out. Are you not hungry, too, little Marie?”</p>
			<p>“I?⁠—not at all. I am not accustomed like you to four meals a day, and I have been to bed so often without my supper that once more does not trouble me.”</p>
			<p>“A woman like you is very convenient; she costs nothing,” said Germain, smiling.</p>
			<p>“I am not a woman,” exclaimed Marie, naïvely, without perceiving the direction the husbandman’s ideas had taken. “Are you dreaming?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, I believe I must be dreaming,” answered Germain. “Perhaps hunger is making my mind wander.”</p>
			<p>“How greedy you are,” answered she, brightening in her turn. “Well, if you can’t live five or six hours without eating, have you not game in your bag and fire to cook it?”</p>
			<p>“By Jove, that’s a good idea! But how about the present to my future father-in-law?”</p>
			<p>“You have six partridges and a hare! I suppose you do not need all of them to satisfy your appetite.”</p>
			<p>“But how can we cook them without a spit or andirons. They will be burned to a cinder!”</p>
			<p>“Not at all,” said little Marie; “I warrant that I can cook them for you under the cinders without a taste of smoke. Have you never caught larks in the fields, and cooked them between two stones? Oh! that is true⁠—I keep forgetting that you have never been a shepherd. Come, pluck the partridge. Not so hard! You will tear the skin.”</p>
			<p>“You might be plucking the other to show me how!”</p>
			<p>“Then you wish to eat two? What an ogre you are! They are all plucked. I am going to cook them.”</p>
			<p>“You would make a perfect little sutler’s girl, Marie, but unhappily you have no canteen, and I shall have to drink water from this pool!”</p>
			<p>“You would like some wine, would you not? Possibly you might prefer coffee. You imagine yourself under the trees at the fair. Call out the host. Some wine for the good husbandman of Belair!”</p>
			<p>“You little witch, you are making fun of me! Would not you drink some wine if you had it?”</p>
			<p>“I? At Mother Rebec’s, with you to-night, I drank some for the second time in my life. But if you are very good, I shall give you a bottle almost full, and excellent too.”</p>
			<p>“What? Marie, I verily believe you are a witch!”</p>
			<p>“Were you not foolish enough to ask for two bottles of wine at the inn? You and your boy drank one, and the other you set before me. I hardly drank three drops, yet you paid for both without looking.”</p>
			<p>“What then?”</p>
			<p>“Why, I put the full one in my basket, because I thought that you or your child would be thirsty on the journey. And here it is.”</p>
			<p>“You are the most thoughtful girl I have ever met. Although the poor child was crying when we left the inn, that did not prevent her from thinking of others more than of herself. Little Marie, the man who marries you will be no fool.”</p>
			<p>“I hope not, for I am not fond of fools. Come, eat up your partridges; they are done to a turn; and for want of bread, you must be satisfied with chestnuts.”</p>
			<p>“Where the deuce did you find chestnuts, too?”</p>
			<p>“It is extraordinary! All along the road I picked them off the branches as we went along, and filled my pockets.”</p>
			<p>“And are they cooked, too?”</p>
			<p>“Where would my wits have been had I not had sense enough to put the chestnuts in the fire as soon as it was lighted? That is the way we always do in the fields.”</p>
			<p>“So we are going to take supper together, little Marie. I want to drink your health and wish you a good husband, just the sort of a man that will suit you. Tell me what kind you want.”</p>
			<p>“I should find that very difficult, Germain, for I have not thought about it yet.”</p>
			<p>“What, not at all? Never?” said Germain, as he began to eat with a laborer’s appetite, yet stopping to cut off the more tender morsels for his companion, who persisted in refusing them and contented herself with a few chestnuts.</p>
			<p>“Tell me, little Marie,” he went on, seeing that she had no intention of answering him, “have you never thought of marrying? Yet you are old enough?”</p>
			<p>“Perhaps,” she said, “but I am too poor. I need at least a hundred crowns to marry, and I must work five or six years to scrape them together.”</p>
			<p>“Poor girl, I wish Father Maurice were willing to give me a hundred crowns to make you a present of.”</p>
			<p>“Thank you kindly, Germain. What do you suppose people would say of me?”</p>
			<p>“What do you wish them to say of you? They know very well that I am too old to marry you. They would never believe that I⁠—that you⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Look, Germain, your child is waking up,” said little Marie.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
